
The Book of Daniel

   {1:1} In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim king of Judah came
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon unto Jerusalem, and besieged it. {1:2}
And the Lord gave Jehoiakim king of Judah into his hand, with part of
the vessels of the house of God: which he carried into the land of
Shinar to the house of his god; and he brought the vessels into the
treasure house of his god.

   {1:3} And the king spake unto Ashpenaz the master of his eunuchs,
that he should bring [certain] of the children of Israel, and of the
king's seed, and of the princes; {1:4} Children in whom [was] no
blemish, but well favoured, and skilful in all wisdom, and cunning in
knowledge, and understanding science, and such as [had] ability in them
to stand in the king's palace, and whom they might teach the learning
and the tongue of the Chaldeans. {1:5} And the king appointed them a
daily provision of the king's meat, and of the wine which he drank: so
nourishing them three years, that at the end thereof they might stand
before the king. {1:6} Now among these were of the children of Judah,
Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah: {1:7} Unto whom the prince of
the eunuchs gave names: for he gave unto Daniel [the name] of
Belteshazzar; and to Hananiah, of Shadrach; and to Mishael, of Meshach;
and to Azariah, of Abed-nego.

   {1:8} But Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not defile
himself with the portion of the king's meat, nor with the wine which he
drank: therefore he requested of the prince of the eunuchs that he
might not defile himself. {1:9} Now God had brought Daniel into favour
and tender love with the prince of the eunuchs. {1:10} And the prince
of the eunuchs said unto Daniel, I fear my lord the king, who hath
appointed your meat and your drink: for why should he see your faces
worse liking than the children which [are] of your sort? then shall ye
make [me] endanger my head to the king. {1:11} Then said Daniel to
Melzar, whom the prince of the eunuchs had set over Daniel, Hananiah,
Mishael, and Azariah, {1:12} Prove thy servants, I beseech thee, ten
days; and let them give us pulse to eat, and water to drink. {1:13}
Then let our countenances be looked upon before thee, and the
countenance of the children that eat of the portion of the king's meat:
and as thou seest, deal with thy servants. {1:14} So he consented to
them in this matter, and proved them ten days. {1:15} And at the end of
ten days their countenances appeared fairer and fatter in flesh than
all the children which did eat the portion of the king's meat. {1:16}
Thus Melzar took away the portion of their meat, and the wine that they
should drink; and gave them pulse.

   {1:17} As for these four children, God gave them knowledge and skill
in all learning and wisdom: and Daniel had understanding in all visions
and dreams. {1:18} Now at the end of the days that the king had said he
should bring them in, then the prince of the eunuchs brought them in
before Nebuchadnezzar. {1:19} And the king communed with them; and
among them all was found none like Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and
Azariah: therefore stood they before the king. {1:20} And in all
matters of wisdom [and] understanding, that the king enquired of them,
he found them ten times better than all the magicians [and] astrologers
that [were] in all his realm. {1:21} And Daniel continued [even] unto
the first year of king Cyrus.

   {2:1} And in the second year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar
Nebuchadnezzar dreamed dreams, wherewith his spirit was troubled, and
his sleep brake from him. {2:2} Then the king commanded to call the
magicians, and the astrologers, and the sorcerers, and the Chaldeans,
for to shew the king his dreams. So they came and stood before the
king. {2:3} And the king said unto them, I have dreamed a dream, and my
spirit was troubled to know the dream. {2:4} Then spake the Chaldeans
to the king in Syriack, O king, live for ever: tell thy servants the
dream, and we will shew the interpretation. {2:5} The king answered and
said to the Chaldeans, The thing is gone from me: if ye will not make
known unto me the dream, with the interpretation thereof, ye shall be
cut in pieces, and your houses shall be made a dunghill. {2:6} But if
ye shew the dream, and the interpretation thereof, ye shall receive of
me gifts and rewards and great honour: therefore shew me the dream, and
the interpretation thereof. {2:7} They answered again and said, Let the
king tell his servants the dream, and we will shew the interpretation
of it. {2:8} The king answered and said, I know of certainty that ye
would gain the time, because ye see the thing is gone from me. {2:9}
But if ye will not make known unto me the dream, [there is but] one
decree for you: for ye have prepared lying and corrupt words to speak
before me, till the time be changed: therefore tell me the dream, and I
shall know that ye can shew me the interpretation thereof.

   {2:10} The Chaldeans answered before the king, and said, There is
not a man upon the earth that can shew the king's matter: therefore
[there is] no king, lord, nor ruler, [that] asked such things at any
magician, or astrologer, or Chaldean. {2:11} And [it is] a rare thing
that the king requireth, and there is none other that can shew it
before the king, except the gods, whose dwelling is not with flesh.
{2:12} For this cause the king was angry and very furious, and
commanded to destroy all the wise [men] of Babylon. {2:13} And the
decree went forth that the wise [men] should be slain; and they sought
Daniel and his fellows to be slain.

   {2:14} Then Daniel answered with counsel and wisdom to Arioch the
captain of the king's guard, which was gone forth to slay the wise
[men] of Babylon: {2:15} He answered and said to Arioch the king's
captain, Why [is] the decree [so] hasty from the king? Then Arioch made
the thing known to Daniel. {2:16} Then Daniel went in, and desired of
the king that he would give him time, and that he would shew the king
the interpretation. {2:17} Then Daniel went to his house, and made the
thing known to Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, his companions: {2:18}
That they would desire mercies of the God of heaven concerning this
secret; that Daniel and his fellows should not perish with the rest of
the wise [men] of Babylon.

   {2:19} Then was the secret revealed unto Daniel in a night vision.
Then Daniel blessed the God of heaven. {2:20} Daniel answered and said,
Blessed be the name of God for ever and ever: for wisdom and might are
his: {2:21} And he changeth the times and the seasons: he removeth
kings, and setteth up kings: he giveth wisdom unto the wise, and
knowledge to them that know understanding: {2:22} He revealeth the deep
and secret things: he knoweth what [is] in the darkness, and the light
dwelleth with him. {2:23} I thank thee, and praise thee, O thou God of
my fathers, who hast given me wisdom and might, and hast made known
unto me now what we desired of thee: for thou hast [now] made known
unto us the king's matter.

   {2:24} Therefore Daniel went in unto Arioch, whom the king had
ordained to destroy the wise [men] of Babylon: he went and said thus
unto him; Destroy not the wise [men] of Babylon: bring me in before the
king, and I will shew unto the king the interpretation. {2:25} Then
Arioch brought in Daniel before the king in haste and said thus unto
him, I have found a man of the captives of Judah, that will make known
unto the king the interpretation. {2:26} The king answered and said to
Daniel, whose name [was] Belteshazzar, Art thou able to make known unto
me the dream which I have seen, and the interpretation thereof? {2:27}
Daniel answered in the presence of the king, and said, The secret which
the king hath demanded cannot the wise [men,] the astrologers, the
magicians, the soothsayers, shew unto the king; {2:28} But there is a
God in heaven that revealeth secrets, and maketh known to the king
Nebuchadnezzar what shall be in the latter days. Thy dream, and the
visions of thy head upon thy bed, are these; {2:29} As for thee, O
king, thy thoughts came [into thy mind] upon thy bed, what should come
to pass hereafter: and he that revealeth secrets maketh known to thee
what shall come to pass. {2:30} But as for me, this secret is not
revealed to me for [any] wisdom that I have more than any living, but
for [their] sakes that shall make known the interpretation to the king,
and that thou mightest know the thoughts of thy heart.

   {2:31} Thou, O king, sawest, and behold a great image. This great
image, whose brightness was excellent, stood before thee; and the form
thereof [was] terrible. {2:32} This image's head [was] of fine gold,
his breast and his arms of silver, his belly and his thighs of brass,
{2:33} His legs of iron, his feet part of iron and part of clay. {2:34}
Thou sawest till that a stone was cut out without hands, which smote
the image upon his feet [that were] of iron and clay, and brake them to
pieces. {2:35} Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and
the gold, broken to pieces together, and became like the chaff of the
summer threshingfloors; and the wind carried them away, that no place
was found for them: and the stone that smote the image became a great
mountain, and filled the whole earth.

   {2:36} This [is] the dream; and we will tell the interpretation
thereof before the king. {2:37} Thou, O king, [art] a king of kings:
for the God of heaven hath given thee a kingdom, power, and strength,
and glory. {2:38} And wheresoever the children of men dwell, the beasts
of the field and the fowls of the heaven hath he given into thine hand,
and hath made thee ruler over them all. Thou [art] this head of gold.
{2:39} And after thee shall arise another kingdom inferior to thee, and
another third kingdom of brass, which shall bear rule over all the
earth. {2:40} And the fourth kingdom shall be strong as iron: forasmuch
as iron breaketh in pieces and subdueth all [things:] and as iron that
breaketh all these, shall it break in pieces and bruise. {2:41} And
whereas thou sawest the feet and toes, part of potters' clay, and part
of iron, the kingdom shall be divided; but there shall be in it of the
strength of the iron, forasmuch as thou sawest the iron mixed with miry
clay. {2:42} And [as] the toes of the feet [were] part of iron, and
part of clay, so the kingdom shall be partly strong, and partly broken.
{2:43} And whereas thou sawest iron mixed with miry clay, they shall
mingle themselves with the seed of men: but they shall not cleave one
to another, even as iron is not mixed with clay. {2:44} And in the days
of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall
never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be left to other people,
[but] it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it
shall stand for ever. {2:45} Forasmuch as thou sawest that the stone
was cut out of the mountain without hands, and that it brake in pieces
the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold; the great God
hath made known to the king what shall come to pass hereafter: and the
dream is certain, and the interpretation thereof sure.

   {2:46} Then the king Nebuchadnezzar fell upon his face, and
worshipped Daniel, and commanded that they should offer an oblation and
sweet odours unto him. {2:47} The king answered unto Daniel, and said,
Of a truth [it is,] that your God is a God of gods, and a Lord of
kings, and a revealer of secrets, seeing thou couldst reveal this
secret. {2:48} Then the king made Daniel a great man, and gave him many
great gifts, and made him ruler over the whole province of Babylon, and
chief of the governors over all the wise [men] of Babylon. {2:49} Then
Daniel requested of the king, and he set Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abed-nego, over the affairs of the province of Babylon: but Daniel
[sat] in the gate of the king.

   {3:1} Nebuchadnezzar the king made an image of gold, whose height
[was] threescore cubits, [and] the breadth thereof six cubits: he set
it up in the plain of Dura, in the province of Babylon. {3:2} Then
Nebuchadnezzar the king sent to gather together the princes, the
governors, and the captains, the judges, the treasurers, the
counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the provinces, to come
to the dedication of the image which Nebuchadnezzar the king had set
up. {3:3} Then the princes, the governors, and captains, the judges,
the treasurers, the counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of
the provinces, were gathered together unto the dedication of the image
that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up; and they stood before the
image that Nebuchadnezzar had set up. {3:4} Then an herald cried aloud,
To you it is commanded, O people, nations, and languages, {3:5} [That]
at what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut,
psaltery, dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, ye fall down and worship
the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king hath set up: {3:6} And
whoso falleth not down and worshippeth shall the same hour be cast into
the midst of a burning fiery furnace. {3:7} Therefore at that time,
when all the people heard the sound of the cornet, flute, harp,
sackbut, psaltery, and all kinds of musick, all the people, the
nations, and the languages, fell down [and] worshipped the golden image
that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up.

   {3:8} Wherefore at that time certain Chaldeans came near, and
accused the Jews. {3:9} They spake and said to the king Nebuchadnezzar,
O king, live for ever. {3:10} Thou, O king, hast made a decree, that
every man that shall hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp,
sackbut, psaltery, and dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, shall fall
down and worship the golden image: {3:11} And whoso falleth not down
and worshippeth, [that] he should be cast into the midst of a burning
fiery furnace. {3:12} There are certain Jews whom thou hast set over
the affairs of the province of Babylon, Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abed-nego; these men, O king, have not regarded thee: they serve not
thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up.

   {3:13} Then Nebuchadnezzar in [his] rage and fury commanded to bring
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego. Then they brought these men before
the king. {3:14} Nebuchadnezzar spake and said unto them, [Is it] true,
O Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, do not ye serve my gods, nor
worship the golden image which I have set up? {3:15} Now if ye be ready
that at what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp,
sackbut, psaltery, and dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, ye fall down
and worship the image which I have made; [well:] but if ye worship not,
ye shall be cast the same hour into the midst of a burning fiery
furnace; and who [is] that God that shall deliver you out of my hands?
{3:16} Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, answered and said to the king,
O Nebuchadnezzar, we [are] not careful to answer thee in this matter.
{3:17} If it be [so,] our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from
the burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver [us] out of thine hand,
O king. {3:18} But if not, be it known unto thee, O king, that we will
not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up.

   {3:19} Then was Nebuchadnezzar full of fury, and the form of his
visage was changed against Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego:
[therefore] he spake, and commanded that they should heat the furnace
one seven times more than it was wont to be heated. {3:20} And he
commanded the most mighty men that [were] in his army to bind Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abed-nego, [and] to cast [them] into the burning fiery
furnace. {3:21} Then these men were bound in their coats, their hosen,
and their hats, and their [other] garments, and were cast into the
midst of the burning fiery furnace. {3:22} Therefore because the king's
commandment was urgent, and the furnace exceeding hot, the flame of the
fire slew those men that took up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed- nego.
{3:23} And these three men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, fell down
bound into the midst of the burning fiery furnace. {3:24} Then
Nebuchadnezzar the king was astonied, and rose up in haste, [and]
spake, and said unto his counsellors, Did not we cast three men bound
into the midst of the fire? They answered and said unto the king, True,
O king. {3:25} He answered and said, Lo, I see four men loose, walking
in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of the
fourth is like the Son of God.

   {3:26} Then Nebuchadnezzar came near to the mouth of the burning
fiery furnace, [and] spake, and said, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego,
ye servants of the most high God, come forth, and come [hither.] Then
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, came forth of the midst of the fire.
{3:27} And the princes, governors, and captains, and the king's
counsellors, being gathered together, saw these men, upon whose bodies
the fire had no power, nor was an hair of their head singed, neither
were their coats changed, nor the smell of fire had passed on them.
{3:28} [Then] Nebuchadnezzar spake, and said, Blessed [be] the God of
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, who hath sent his angel, and
delivered his servants that trusted in him, and have changed the king's
word, and yielded their bodies, that they might not serve nor worship
any god, except their own God. {3:29} Therefore I make a decree, That
every people, nation, and language, which speak any thing amiss against
the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, shall be cut in pieces,
and their houses shall be made a dunghill: because there is no other
God that can deliver after this sort. {3:30} Then the king promoted
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, in the province of Babylon.

   {4:1} Nebuchadnezzar the king, unto all people, nations, and
languages, that dwell in all the earth; Peace be multiplied unto you.
{4:2} I thought it good to shew the signs and wonders that the high God
hath wrought toward me. {4:3} How great [are] his signs! and how mighty
[are] his wonders! his kingdom [is] an everlasting kingdom, and his
dominion [is] from generation to generation.

   {4:4} I Nebuchadnezzar was at rest in mine house, and flourishing in
my palace: {4:5} I saw a dream which made me afraid, and the thoughts
upon my bed and the visions of my head troubled me. {4:6} Therefore
made I a decree to bring in all the wise [men] of Babylon before me,
that they might make known unto me the interpretation of the dream.
{4:7} Then came in the magicians, the astrologers, the Chaldeans, and
the soothsayers: and I told the dream before them; but they did not
make known unto me the interpretation thereof.

   {4:8} But at the last Daniel came in before me, whose name [was]
Belteshazzar, according to the name of my god, and in whom is the
spirit of the holy gods: and before him I told the dream, [saying,
]{4:9} O Belteshazzar, master of the magicians, because I know that the
spirit of the holy gods [is] in thee, and no secret troubleth thee,
tell me the visions of my dream that I have seen, and the
interpretation thereof. {4:10} Thus [were] the visions of mine head in
my bed; I saw, and behold a tree in the midst of the earth, and the
height thereof [was] great. {4:11} The tree grew, and was strong, and
the height thereof reached unto heaven, and the sight thereof to the
end of all the earth: {4:12} The leaves thereof [were] fair, and the
fruit thereof much, and in it [was] meat for all: the beasts of the
field had shadow under it, and the fowls of the heaven dwelt in the
boughs thereof, and all flesh was fed of it. {4:13} I saw in the
visions of my head upon my bed, and, behold, a watcher and an holy one
came down from heaven; {4:14} He cried aloud, and said thus, Hew down
the tree, and cut off his branches, shake off his leaves, and scatter
his fruit: let the beasts get away from under it, and the fowls from
his branches: {4:15} Nevertheless leave the stump of his roots in the
earth, even with a band of iron and brass, in the tender grass of the
field; and let it be wet with the dew of heaven, and [let] his portion
[be] with the beasts in the grass of the earth: {4:16} Let his heart be
changed from man's, and let a beast's heart be given unto him; and let
seven times pass over him. {4:17} This matter [is] by the decree of the
watchers, and the demand by the word of the holy ones: to the intent
that the living may know that the most High ruleth in the kingdom of
men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will, and setteth up over it the
basest of men. {4:18} This dream I king Nebuchadnezzar have seen. Now
thou, O Belteshazzar, declare the interpretation thereof, forasmuch as
all the wise [men] of my kingdom are not able to make known unto me the
interpretation: but thou [art] able; for the spirit of the holy gods
[is] in thee.

   {4:19} Then Daniel, whose name [was] Belteshazzar, was astonied for
one hour, and his thoughts troubled him. The king spake, and said,
Belteshazzar, let not the dream, or the interpretation thereof, trouble
thee. Belteshazzar answered and said, My lord, the dream [be] to them
that hate thee, and the interpretation thereof to thine enemies. {4:20}
The tree that thou sawest, which grew, and was strong, whose height
reached unto the heaven, and the sight thereof to all the earth; {4:21}
Whose leaves [were] fair, and the fruit thereof much, and in it [was]
meat for all; under which the beasts of the field dwelt, and upon whose
branches the fowls of the heaven had their habitation: {4:22} It [is]
thou, O king, that art grown and become strong: for thy greatness is
grown, and reacheth unto heaven, and thy dominion to the end of the
earth. {4:23} And whereas the king saw a watcher and an holy one coming
down from heaven, and saying, Hew the tree down, and destroy it; yet
leave the stump of the roots thereof in the earth, even with a band of
iron and brass, in the tender grass of the field; and let it be wet
with the dew of heaven, and [let] his portion [be] with the beasts of
the field, till seven times pass over him; {4:24} This [is] the
interpretation, O king, and this [is] the decree of the most High,
which is come upon my lord the king: {4:25} That they shall drive thee
from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field, and
they shall make thee to eat grass as oxen, and they shall wet thee with
the dew of heaven, and seven times shall pass over thee, till thou know
that the most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to
whomsoever he will. {4:26} And whereas they commanded to leave the
stump of the tree roots; thy kingdom shall be sure unto thee, after
that thou shalt have known that the heavens do rule. {4:27} Wherefore,
O king, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and break off thy sins
by righteousness, and thine iniquities by shewing mercy to the poor; if
it may be a lengthening of thy tranquility.

   {4:28} All this came upon the king Nebuchadnezzar. {4:29} At the end
of twelve months he walked in the palace of the kingdom of Babylon.
{4:30} The king spake, and said, Is not this great Babylon, that I have
built for the house of the kingdom by the might of my power, and for
the honour of my majesty? {4:31} While the word [was] in the king's
mouth, there fell a voice from heaven, [saying,] O king Nebuchadnezzar,
to thee it is spoken; The kingdom is departed from thee. {4:32} And
they shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling [shall be] with the
beasts of the field: they shall make thee to eat grass as oxen, and
seven times shall pass over thee, until thou know that the most High
ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will.
{4:33} The same hour was the thing fulfilled upon Nebuchadnezzar: and
he was driven from men, and did eat grass as oxen, and his body was wet
with the dew of heaven, till his hairs were grown like eagles
[feathers,] and his nails like birds' [claws. ]{4:34} And at the end of
the days I Nebuchadnezzar lifted up mine eyes unto heaven, and mine
understanding returned unto me, and I blessed the most High, and I
praised and honoured him that liveth for ever, whose dominion [is] an
everlasting dominion, and his kingdom [is] from generation to
generation: {4:35} And all the inhabitants of the earth [are] reputed
as nothing: and he doeth according to his will in the army of heaven,
and [among] the inhabitants of the earth: and none can stay his hand,
or say unto him, What doest thou? {4:36} At the same time my reason
returned unto me; and for the glory of my kingdom, mine honour and
brightness returned unto me; and my counsellors and my lords sought
unto me; and I was established in my kingdom, and excellent majesty was
added unto me. {4:37} Now I Nebuchadnezzar praise and extol and honour
the King of heaven, all whose works [are] truth, and his ways judgment:
and those that walk in pride he is able to abase.

   {5:1} Belshazzar the king made a great feast to a thousand of his
lords, and drank wine before the thousand. {5:2} Belshazzar, whiles he
tasted the wine, commanded to bring the golden and silver vessels which
his father Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the temple which [was] in
Jerusalem; that the king, and his princes, his wives, and his
concubines, might drink therein. {5:3} Then they brought the golden
vessels that were taken out of the temple of the house of God which
[was] at Jerusalem; and the king, and his princes, his wives, and his
concubines, drank in them. {5:4} They drank wine, and praised the gods
of gold, and of silver, of brass, of iron, of wood, and of stone.

   {5:5} In the same hour came forth fingers of a man's hand, and wrote
over against the candlestick upon the plaister of the wall of the
king's palace: and the king saw the part of the hand that wrote. {5:6}
Then the king's countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him,
so that the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one
against another. {5:7} The king cried aloud to bring in the
astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the soothsayers. [And] the king spake,
and said to the wise [men] of Babylon, Whosoever shall read this
writing, and shew me the interpretation thereof, shall be clothed with
scarlet, and [have] a chain of gold about his neck, and shall be the
third ruler in the kingdom. {5:8} Then came in all the king's wise
[men:] but they could not read the writing, nor make known to the king
the interpretation thereof. {5:9} Then was king Belshazzar greatly
troubled, and his countenance was changed in him, and his lords were
astonied.

   {5:10} [Now] the queen, by reason of the words of the king and his
lords, came into the banquet house: [and] the queen spake and said, O
king, live for ever: let not thy thoughts trouble thee, nor let thy
countenance be changed: {5:11} There is a man in thy kingdom, in whom
[is] the spirit of the holy gods; and in the days of thy father light
and understanding and wisdom, like the wisdom of the gods, was found in
him; whom the king Nebuchadnezzar thy father, the king, [I say,] thy
father, made master of the magicians, astrologers, Chaldeans, [and]
soothsayers; {5:12} Forasmuch as an excellent spirit, and knowledge,
and understanding, interpreting of dreams, and shewing of hard
sentences, and dissolving of doubts, were found in the same Daniel,
whom the king named Belteshazzar: now let Daniel be called, and he will
shew the interpretation. {5:13} Then was Daniel brought in before the
king. [And] the king spake and said unto Daniel, [Art] thou that
Daniel, which [art] of the children of the captivity of Judah, whom the
king my father brought out of Jewry? {5:14} I have even heard of thee,
that the spirit of the gods [is] in thee, and [that] light and
understanding and excellent wisdom is found in thee. {5:15} And now the
wise [men,] the astrologers, have been brought in before me, that they
should read this writing, and make known unto me the interpretation
thereof: but they could not shew the interpretation of the thing:
{5:16} And I have heard of thee, that thou canst make interpretations,
and dissolve doubts: now if thou canst read the writing, and make known
to me the interpretation thereof, thou shalt be clothed with scarlet,
and [have] a chain of gold about thy neck, and shalt be the third ruler
in the kingdom.

   {5:17} Then Daniel answered and said before the king, Let thy gifts
be to thyself, and give thy rewards to another; yet I will read the
writing unto the king, and make known to him the interpretation. {5:18}
O thou king, the most high God gave Nebuchadnezzar thy father a
kingdom, and majesty, and glory, and honour: {5:19} And for the majesty
that he gave him, all people, nations, and languages, trembled and
feared before him: whom he would he slew; and whom he would he kept
alive; and whom he would he set up; and whom he would he put down.
{5:20} But when his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in
pride, he was deposed from his kingly throne, and they took his glory
from him: {5:21} And he was driven from the sons of men; and his heart
was made like the beasts, and his dwelling [was] with the wild asses:
they fed him with grass like oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of
heaven; till he knew that the most high God ruled in the kingdom of
men, and [that] he appointeth over it whomsoever he will. {5:22} And
thou his son, O Belshazzar, hast not humbled thine heart, though thou
knewest all this; {5:23} But hast lifted up thyself against the Lord of
heaven; and they have brought the vessels of his house before thee, and
thou, and thy lords, thy wives, and thy concubines, have drunk wine in
them; and thou hast praised the gods of silver, and gold, of brass,
iron, wood, and stone, which see not, nor hear, nor know: and the God
in whose hand thy breath [is,] and whose [are] all thy ways, hast thou
not glorified: {5:24} Then was the part of the hand sent from him; and
this writing was written.

   {5:25} And this [is] the writing that was written, MENE, MENE,
TEKEL, UPHARSIN. {5:26} This [is] the interpretation of the thing:
MENE; God hath numbered thy kingdom, and finished it. {5:27} TEKEL;
Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting. {5:28} PERES;
Thy kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and Persians. {5:29}
Then commanded Belshazzar, and they clothed Daniel with scarlet, and
[put] a chain of gold about his neck, and made a proclamation
concerning him, that he should be the third ruler in the kingdom.

   {5:30} In that night was Belshazzar the king of the Chaldeans slain.
{5:31} And Darius the Median took the kingdom, [being] about threescore
and two years old.

   {6:1} It pleased Darius to set over the kingdom an hundred and
twenty princes, which should be over the whole kingdom; {6:2} And over
these three presidents; of whom Daniel [was] first: that the princes
might give accounts unto them, and the king should have no damage.
{6:3} Then this Daniel was preferred above the presidents and princes,
because an excellent spirit [was] in him; and the king thought to set
him over the whole realm.

   {6:4} Then the presidents and princes sought to find occasion
against Daniel concerning the kingdom; but they could find none
occasion nor fault; forasmuch as he [was] faithful, neither was there
any error or fault found in him. {6:5} Then said these men, We shall
not find any occasion against this Daniel, except we find [it] against
him concerning the law of his God. {6:6} Then these presidents and
princes assembled together to the king, and said thus unto him, King
Darius, live for ever. {6:7} All the presidents of the kingdom, the
governors, and the princes, the counsellors, and the captains, have
consulted together to establish a royal statute, and to make a firm
decree, that whosoever shall ask a petition of any God or man for
thirty days, save of thee, O king, he shall be cast into the den of
lions. {6:8} Now, O king, establish the decree, and sign the writing,
that it be not changed, according to the law of the Medes and Persians,
which altereth not. {6:9} Wherefore king Darius signed the writing and
the decree.

   {6:10} Now when Daniel knew that the writing was signed, he went
into his house; and his windows being open in his chamber toward
Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and prayed, and
gave thanks before his God, as he did aforetime. {6:11} Then these men
assembled, and found Daniel praying and making supplication before his
God. {6:12} Then they came near, and spake before the king concerning
the king's decree; Hast thou not signed a decree, that every man that
shall ask [a petition] of any God or man within thirty days, save of
thee, O king, shall be cast into the den of lions? The king answered
and said, The thing is true, according to the law of the Medes and
Persians, which altereth not. {6:13} Then answered they and said before
the king, That Daniel, which [is] of the children of the captivity of
Judah, regardeth not thee, O king, nor the decree that thou hast
signed, but maketh his petition three times a day. {6:14} Then the
king, when he heard [these] words, was sore displeased with himself,
and set [his] heart on Daniel to deliver him: and he laboured till the
going down of the sun to deliver him. {6:15} Then these men assembled
unto the king, and said unto the king, Know, O king, that the law of
the Medes and Persians [is,] That no decree nor statute which the king
establisheth may be changed. {6:16} Then the king commanded, and they
brought Daniel, and cast [him] into the den of lions. [Now] the king
spake and said unto Daniel, Thy God whom thou servest continually, he
will deliver thee. {6:17} And a stone was brought and laid upon the
mouth of the den; and the king sealed it with his own signet, and with
the signet of his lords; that the purpose might not be changed
concerning Daniel.

   {6:18} Then the king went to his palace, and passed the night
fasting: neither were instruments of musick brought before him: and his
sleep went from him. {6:19} Then the king arose very early in the
morning, and went in haste unto the den of lions. {6:20} And when he
came to the den, he cried with a lamentable voice unto Daniel: [and]
the king spake and said to Daniel, O Daniel, servant of the living God,
is thy God, whom thou servest continually, able to deliver thee from
the lions? {6:21} Then said Daniel unto the king, O king, live for
ever. {6:22} My God hath sent his angel, and hath shut the lions
mouths, that they have not hurt me: forasmuch as before him innocency
was found in me; and also before thee, O king, have I done no hurt.
{6:23} Then was the king exceeding glad for him, and commanded that
they should take Daniel up out of the den. So Daniel was taken up out
of the den, and no manner of hurt was found upon him, because he
believed in his God.

   {6:24} And the king commanded, and they brought those men which had
accused Daniel, and they cast [them] into the den of lions, them, their
children, and their wives; and the lions had the mastery of them, and
brake all their bones in pieces or ever they came at the bottom of the
den.

   {6:25} Then king Darius wrote unto all people, nations, and
languages, that dwell in all the earth; Peace be multiplied unto you.
{6:26} I make a decree, That in every dominion of my kingdom men
tremble and fear before the God of Daniel: for he is the living God,
and stedfast for ever, and his kingdom [that] which shall not be
destroyed, and his dominion [shall be even] unto the end. {6:27} He
delivereth and rescueth, and he worketh signs and wonders in heaven and
in earth, who hath delivered Daniel from the power of the lions. {6:28}
So this Daniel prospered in the reign of Darius, and in the reign of
Cyrus the Persian.

   {7:1} In the first year of Belshazzar king of Babylon Daniel had a
dream and visions of his head upon his bed: then he wrote the dream,
[and] told the sum of the matters. {7:2} Daniel spake and said, I saw
in my vision by night, and, behold, the four winds of the heaven strove
upon the great sea. {7:3} And four great beasts came up from the sea,
diverse one from another. {7:4} The first [was] like a lion, and had
eagle's wings: I beheld till the wings thereof were plucked, and it was
lifted up from the earth, and made stand upon the feet as a man, and a
man's heart was given to it. {7:5} And behold another beast, a second,
like to a bear, and it raised up itself on one side, and [it had] three
ribs in the mouth of it between the teeth of it: and they said thus
unto it, Arise, devour much flesh. {7:6} After this I beheld, and lo
another, like a leopard, which had upon the back of it four wings of a
fowl; the beast had also four heads; and dominion was given to it.
{7:7} After this I saw in the night visions, and behold a fourth beast,
dreadful and terrible, and strong exceedingly; and it had great iron
teeth: it devoured and brake in pieces, and stamped the residue with
the feet of it: and it [was] diverse from all the beasts that [were]
before it; and it had ten horns. {7:8} I considered the horns, and,
behold, there came up among them another little horn, before whom there
were three of the first horns plucked up by the roots: and, behold, in
this horn [were] eyes like the eyes of man, and a mouth speaking great
things.

   {7:9} I beheld till the thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of
days did sit, whose garment [was] white as snow, and the hair of his
head like the pure wool: his throne [was like] the fiery flame, [and]
his wheels [as] burning fire. {7:10} A fiery stream issued and came
forth from before him: thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten
thousand times ten thousand stood before him: the judgment was set, and
the books were opened. {7:11} I beheld then because of the voice of the
great words which the horn spake: I beheld [even] till the beast was
slain, and his body destroyed, and given to the burning flame. {7:12}
As concerning the rest of the beasts, they had their dominion taken
away: yet their lives were prolonged for a season and time. {7:13} I
saw in the night visions, and, behold, [one] like the Son of man came
with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they
brought him near before him. {7:14} And there was given him dominion,
and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages,
should serve him: his dominion [is] an everlasting dominion, which
shall not pass away, and his kingdom [that] which shall not be
destroyed.

   {7:15} I Daniel was grieved in my spirit in the midst of [my] body,
and the visions of my head troubled me. {7:16} I came near unto one of
them that stood by, and asked him the truth of all this. So he told me,
and made me know the interpretation of the things. {7:17} These great
beasts, which are four, [are] four kings, [which] shall arise out of
the earth. {7:18} But the saints of the most High shall take the
kingdom, and possess the kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever.
{7:19} Then I would know the truth of the fourth beast, which was
diverse from all the others, exceeding dreadful, whose teeth [were of]
iron, and his nails [of] brass; [which] devoured, brake in pieces, and
stamped the residue with his feet; {7:20} And of the ten horns that
[were] in his head, and [of] the other which came up, and before whom
three fell; even [of] that horn that had eyes, and a mouth that spake
very great things, whose look [was] more stout than his fellows. {7:21}
I beheld, and the same horn made war with the saints, and prevailed
against them; {7:22} Until the Ancient of days came, and judgment was
given to the saints of the most High; and the time came that the saints
possessed the kingdom. {7:23} Thus he said, The fourth beast shall be
the fourth kingdom upon earth, which shall be diverse from all
kingdoms, and shall devour the whole earth, and shall tread it down,
and break it in pieces. {7:24} And the ten horns out of this kingdom
[are] ten kings [that] shall arise: and another shall rise after them;
and he shall be diverse from the first, and he shall subdue three
kings. {7:25} And he shall speak [great] words against the most High,
and shall wear out the saints of the most High, and think to change
times and laws: and they shall be given into his hand until a time and
times and the dividing of time. {7:26} But the judgment shall sit, and
they shall take away his dominion, to consume and to destroy [it] unto
the end. {7:27} And the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the
kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the
saints of the most High, whose kingdom [is] an everlasting kingdom, and
all dominions shall serve and obey him. {7:28} Hitherto [is] the end of
the matter. As for me Daniel, my cogitations much troubled me, and my
countenance changed in me: but I kept the matter in my heart.

   {8:1} In the third year of the reign of king Belshazzar a vision
appeared unto me, [even unto] me Daniel, after that which appeared unto
me at the first. {8:2} And I saw in a vision; and it came to pass, when
I saw, that I [was] at Shushan [in] the palace, which [is] in the
province of Elam; and I saw in a vision, and I was by the river of
Ulai. {8:3} Then I lifted up mine eyes, and saw, and, behold, there
stood before the river a ram which had [two] horns: and the [two] horns
[were] high; but one [was] higher than the other, and the higher came
up last. {8:4} I saw the ram pushing westward, and northward, and
southward; so that no beasts might stand before him, neither [was there
any] that could deliver out of his hand; but he did according to his
will, and became great. {8:5} And as I was considering, behold, an he
goat came from the west on the face of the whole earth, and touched not
the ground: and the goat [had] a notable horn between his eyes. {8:6}
And he came to the ram that had [two] horns, which I had seen standing
before the river, and ran unto him in the fury of his power. {8:7} And
I saw him come close unto the ram, and he was moved with choler against
him, and smote the ram, and brake his two horns: and there was no power
in the ram to stand before him, but he cast him down to the ground, and
stamped upon him: and there was none that could deliver the ram out of
his hand. {8:8} Therefore the he goat waxed very great: and when he was
strong, the great horn was broken; and for it came up four notable ones
toward the four winds of heaven. {8:9} And out of one of them came
forth a little horn, which waxed exceeding great, toward the south, and
toward the east, and toward the pleasant [land. ]{8:10} And it waxed
great, [even] to the host of heaven; and it cast down [some] of the
host and of the stars to the ground, and stamped upon them. {8:11} Yea,
he magnified [himself] even to the prince of the host, and by him the
daily [sacrifice] was taken away, and the place of his sanctuary was
cast down. {8:12} And an host was given [him] against the daily
[sacrifice] by reason of transgression, and it cast down the truth to
the ground; and it practised, and prospered.

   {8:13} Then I heard one saint speaking, and another saint said unto
that certain [saint] which spake, How long [shall be] the vision
[concerning] the daily [sacrifice,] and the transgression of
desolation, to give both the sanctuary and the host to be trodden under
foot? {8:14} And he said unto me, Unto two thousand and three hundred
days; then shall the sanctuary be cleansed.

   {8:15} And it came to pass, when I, [even] I Daniel, had seen the
vision, and sought for the meaning, then, behold, there stood before me
as the appearance of a man. {8:16} And I heard a man's voice between
[the banks of] Ulai, which called, and said, Gabriel, make this [man]
to understand the vision. {8:17} So he came near where I stood: and
when he came, I was afraid, and fell upon my face: but he said unto me,
Understand, O son of man: for at the time of the end [shall be] the
vision. {8:18} Now as he was speaking with me, I was in a deep sleep on
my face toward the ground: but he touched me, and set me upright.
{8:19} And he said, Behold, I will make thee know what shall be in the
last end of the indignation: for at the time appointed the end [shall
be. ]{8:20} The ram which thou sawest having [two] horns [are] the
kings of Media and Persia. {8:21} And the rough goat [is] the king of
Grecia: and the great horn that [is] between his eyes [is] the first
king. {8:22} Now that being broken, whereas four stood up for it, four
kingdoms shall stand up out of the nation, but not in his power. {8:23}
And in the latter time of their kingdom, when the transgressors are
come to the full, a king of fierce countenance, and understanding dark
sentences, shall stand up. {8:24} And his power shall be mighty, but
not by his own power: and he shall destroy wonderfully, and shall
prosper, and practise, and shall destroy the mighty and the holy
people. {8:25} And through his policy also he shall cause craft to
prosper in his hand; and he shall magnify [himself] in his heart, and
by peace shall destroy many: he shall also stand up against the Prince
of princes; but he shall be broken without hand. {8:26} And the vision
of the evening and the morning which was told [is] true: wherefore shut
thou up the vision; for it [shall be] for many days. {8:27} And I
Daniel fainted, and was sick [certain] days; afterward I rose up, and
did the king's business; and I was astonished at the vision, but none
understood [it.]

   {9:1} In the first year of Darius the son of Ahasuerus, of the seed
of the Medes, which was made king over the realm of the Chaldeans;
{9:2} In the first year of his reign I Daniel understood by books the
number of the years, whereof the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah the
prophet, that he would accomplish seventy years in the desolations of
Jerusalem.

   {9:3} And I set my face unto the Lord God, to seek by prayer and
supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes: {9:4} And I
prayed unto the LORD my God, and made my confession, and said, O Lord,
the great and dreadful God, keeping the covenant and mercy to them that
love him, and to them that keep his commandments; {9:5} We have sinned,
and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have rebelled,
even by departing from thy precepts and from thy judgments: {9:6}
Neither have we hearkened unto thy servants the prophets, which spake
in thy name to our kings, our princes, and our fathers, and to all the
people of the land. {9:7} O Lord, righteousness [belongeth] unto thee,
but unto us confusion of faces, as at this day; to the men of Judah,
and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and unto all Israel, [that are]
near, and [that are] far off, through all the countries whither thou
hast driven them, because of their trespass that they have trespassed
against thee. {9:8} O Lord, to us [belongeth] confusion of face, to our
kings, to our princes, and to our fathers, because we have sinned
against thee. {9:9} To the Lord our God [belong] mercies and
forgivenesses, though we have rebelled against him; {9:10} Neither have
we obeyed the voice of the LORD our God, to walk in his laws, which he
set before us by his servants the prophets. {9:11} Yea, all Israel have
transgressed thy law, even by departing, that they might not obey thy
voice; therefore the curse is poured upon us, and the oath that [is]
written in the law of Moses the servant of God, because we have sinned
against him. {9:12} And he hath confirmed his words, which he spake
against us, and against our judges that judged us, by bringing upon us
a great evil: for under the whole heaven hath not been done as hath
been done upon Jerusalem. {9:13} As [it is] written in the law of
Moses, all this evil is come upon us: yet made we not our prayer before
the LORD our God, that we might turn from our iniquities, and
understand thy truth. {9:14} Therefore hath the LORD watched upon the
evil, and brought it upon us: for the LORD our God [is] righteous in
all his works which he doeth: for we obeyed not his voice. {9:15} And
now, O Lord our God, that hast brought thy people forth out of the land
of Egypt with a mighty hand, and hast gotten thee renown, as at this
day; we have sinned, we have done wickedly.

   {9:16} O Lord, according to all thy righteousness, I beseech thee,
let thine anger and thy fury be turned away from thy city Jerusalem,
thy holy mountain: because for our sins, and for the iniquities of our
fathers, Jerusalem and thy people [are become] a reproach to all [that
are] about us. {9:17} Now therefore, O our God, hear the prayer of thy
servant, and his supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon thy
sanctuary that is desolate, for the Lord's sake. {9:18} O my God,
incline thine ear, and hear; open thine eyes, and behold our
desolations, and the city which is called by thy name: for we do not
present our supplications before thee for our righteousnesses, but for
thy great mercies. {9:19} O Lord, hear; O Lord, forgive; O Lord,
hearken and do; defer not, for thine own sake, O my God: for thy city
and thy people are called by thy name.

   {9:20} And whiles I [was] speaking, and praying, and confessing my
sin and the sin of my people Israel, and presenting my supplication
before the LORD my God for the holy mountain of my God; {9:21} Yea,
whiles I [was] speaking in prayer, even the man Gabriel, whom I had
seen in the vision at the beginning, being caused to fly swiftly,
touched me about the time of the evening oblation. {9:22} And he
informed [me,] and talked with me, and said, O Daniel, I am now come
forth to give thee skill and understanding. {9:23} At the beginning of
thy supplications the commandment came forth, and I am come to shew
[thee;] for thou [art] greatly beloved: therefore understand the
matter, and consider the vision. {9:24} Seventy weeks are determined
upon thy people and upon thy holy city, to finish the transgression,
and to make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity,
and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the vision
and prophecy, and to anoint the most Holy. {9:25} Know therefore and
understand, [that] from the going forth of the commandment to restore
and to build Jerusalem unto the Messiah the Prince [shall be] seven
weeks, and threescore and two weeks: the street shall be built again,
and the wall, even in troublous times. {9:26} And after threescore and
two weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but not for himself: and the people
of the prince that shall come shall destroy the city and the sanctuary;
and the end thereof [shall be] with a flood, and unto the end of the
war desolations are determined. {9:27} And he shall confirm the
covenant with many for one week: and in the midst of the week he shall
cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease, and for the
overspreading of abominations he shall make [it] desolate, even until
the consummation, and that determined shall be poured upon the desolate.

   {10:1} In the third year of Cyrus king of Persia a thing was
revealed unto Daniel, whose name was called Belteshazzar; and the thing
[was] true, but the time appointed [was] long: and he understood the
thing, and had understanding of the vision. {10:2} In those days I
Daniel was mourning three full weeks. {10:3} I ate no pleasant bread,
neither came flesh nor wine in my mouth, neither did I anoint myself at
all, till three whole weeks were fulfilled. {10:4} And in the four and
twentieth day of the first month, as I was by the side of the great
river, which [is] Hiddekel; {10:5} Then I lifted up mine eyes, and
looked, and behold a certain man clothed in linen, whose loins [were]
girded with fine gold of Uphaz: {10:6} His body also [was] like the
beryl, and his face as the appearance of lightning, and his eyes as
lamps of fire, and his arms and his feet like in colour to polished
brass, and the voice of his words like the voice of a multitude. {10:7}
And I Daniel alone saw the vision: for the men that were with me saw
not the vision; but a great quaking fell upon them, so that they fled
to hide themselves. {10:8} Therefore I was left alone, and saw this
great vision, and there remained no strength in me: for my comeliness
was turned in me into corruption, and I retained no strength. {10:9}
Yet heard I the voice of his words: and when I heard the voice of his
words, then was I in a deep sleep on my face, and my face toward the
ground.

   {10:10} And, behold, an hand touched me, which set me upon my knees
and [upon] the palms of my hands. {10:11} And he said unto me, O
Daniel, a man greatly beloved, understand the words that I speak unto
thee, and stand upright: for unto thee am I now sent. And when he had
spoken this word unto me, I stood trembling. {10:12} Then said he unto
me, Fear not, Daniel: for from the first day that thou didst set thine
heart to understand, and to chasten thyself before thy God, thy words
were heard, and I am come for thy words. {10:13} But the prince of the
kingdom of Persia withstood me one and twenty days: but, lo, Michael,
one of the chief princes, came to help me; and I remained there with
the kings of Persia. {10:14} Now I am come to make thee understand what
shall befall thy people in the latter days: for yet the vision [is] for
[many] days. {10:15} And when he had spoken such words unto me, I set
my face toward the ground, and I became dumb. {10:16} And, behold,
[one] like the similitude of the sons of men touched my lips: then I
opened my mouth, and spake, and said unto him that stood before me, O
my lord, by the vision my sorrows are turned upon me, and I have
retained no strength. {10:17} For how can the servant of this my lord
talk with this my lord? for as for me, straightway there remained no
strength in me, neither is there breath left in me. {10:18} Then there
came again and touched me [one] like the appearance of a man, and he
strengthened me, {10:19} And said, O man greatly beloved, fear not:
peace [be] unto thee, be strong, yea, be strong. And when he had spoken
unto me, I was strengthened, and said, Let my lord speak; for thou hast
strengthened me. {10:20} Then said he, Knowest thou wherefore I come
unto thee? and now will I return to fight with the prince of Persia:
and when I am gone forth, lo, the prince of Grecia shall come. {10:21}
But I will shew thee that which is noted in the scripture of truth: and
[there is] none that holdeth with me in these things, but Michael your
prince.

   {11:1} Also I in the first year of Darius the Mede, [even] I, stood
to confirm and to strengthen him. {11:2} And now will I shew thee the
truth. Behold, there shall stand up yet three kings in Persia; and the
fourth shall be far richer than [they] all: and by his strength through
his riches he shall stir up all against the realm of Grecia. {11:3} And
a mighty king shall stand up, that shall rule with great dominion, and
do according to his will. {11:4} And when he shall stand up, his
kingdom shall be broken, and shall be divided toward the four winds of
heaven; and not to his posterity, nor according to his dominion which
he ruled: for his kingdom shall be plucked up, even for others beside
those.

   {11:5} And the king of the south shall be strong, and [one] of his
princes; and he shall be strong above him, and have dominion; his
dominion [shall be] a great dominion. {11:6} And in the end of years
they shall join themselves together; for the king's daughter of the
south shall come to the king of the north to make an agreement: but she
shall not retain the power of the arm; neither shall he stand, nor his
arm: but she shall be given up, and they that brought her, and he that
begat her, and he that strengthened her in [these] times. {11:7} But
out of a branch of her roots shall [one] stand up in his estate, which
shall come with an army, and shall enter into the fortress of the king
of the north, and shall deal against them, and shall prevail: {11:8}
And shall also carry captives into Egypt their gods, with their
princes, [and] with their precious vessels of silver and of gold; and
he shall continue [more] years than the king of the north. {11:9} So
the king of the south shall come into [his] kingdom, and shall return
into his own land. {11:10} But his sons shall be stirred up, and shall
assemble a multitude of great forces: and [one] shall certainly come,
and overflow, and pass through: then shall he return, and be stirred
up, [even] to his fortress. {11:11} And the king of the south shall be
moved with choler, and shall come forth and fight with him, [even] with
the king of the north: and he shall set forth a great multitude; but
the multitude shall be given into his hand. {11:12} [And] when he hath
taken away the multitude, his heart shall be lifted up; and he shall
cast down [many] ten thousands: but he shall not be strengthened [by
it. ]{11:13} For the king of the north shall return, and shall set
forth a multitude greater than the former, and shall certainly come
after certain years with a great army and with much riches. {11:14} And
in those times there shall many stand up against the king of the south:
also the robbers of thy people shall exalt themselves to establish the
vision; but they shall fall. {11:15} So the king of the north shall
come, and cast up a mount, and take the most fenced cities: and the
arms of the south shall not withstand, neither his chosen people,
neither [shall there be any] strength to withstand. {11:16} But he that
cometh against him shall do according to his own will, and none shall
stand before him: and he shall stand in the glorious land, which by his
hand shall be consumed. {11:17} He shall also set his face to enter
with the strength of his whole kingdom, and upright ones with him; thus
shall he do: and he shall give him the daughter of women, corrupting
her: but she shall not stand [on his side,] neither be for him. {11:18}
After this shall he turn his face unto the isles, and shall take many:
but a prince for his own behalf shall cause the reproach offered by him
to cease; without his own reproach he shall cause [it] to turn upon
him. {11:19} Then he shall turn his face toward the fort of his own
land: but he shall stumble and fall, and not be found. {11:20} Then
shall stand up in his estate a raiser of taxes [in] the glory of the
kingdom: but within few days he shall be destroyed, neither in anger,
nor in battle. {11:21} And in his estate shall stand up a vile person,
to whom they shall not give the honour of the kingdom: but he shall
come in peaceably, and obtain the kingdom by flatteries. {11:22} And
with the arms of a flood shall they be overflown from before him, and
shall be broken; yea, also the prince of the covenant. {11:23} And
after the league [made] with him he shall work deceitfully: for he
shall come up, and shall become strong with a small people. {11:24} He
shall enter peaceably even upon the fattest places of the province; and
he shall do [that] which his fathers have not done, nor his fathers'
fathers; he shall scatter among them the prey, and spoil, and riches:
[yea,] and he shall forecast his devices against the strong holds, even
for a time. {11:25} And he shall stir up his power and his courage
against the king of the south with a great army; and the king of the
south shall be stirred up to battle with a very great and mighty army;
but he shall not stand: for they shall forecast devices against him.
{11:26} Yea, they that feed of the portion of his meat shall destroy
him, and his army shall overflow: and many shall fall down slain.
{11:27} And both these kings' hearts [shall be] to do mischief, and
they shall speak lies at one table; but it shall not prosper: for yet
the end [shall be] at the time appointed. {11:28} Then shall he return
into his land with great riches; and his heart [shall be] against the
holy covenant; and he shall do [exploits,] and return to his own land.
{11:29} At the time appointed he shall return, and come toward the
south; but it shall not be as the former, or as the latter.

   {11:30} For the ships of Chittim shall come against him: therefore
he shall be grieved, and return, and have indignation against the holy
covenant: so shall he do; he shall even return, and have intelligence
with them that forsake the holy covenant. {11:31} And arms shall stand
on his part, and they shall pollute the sanctuary of strength, and
shall take away the daily [sacrifice,] and they shall place the
abomination that maketh desolate. {11:32} And such as do wickedly
against the covenant shall he corrupt by flatteries: but the people
that do know their God shall be strong, and do [exploits. ]{11:33} And
they that understand among the people shall instruct many: yet they
shall fall by the sword, and by flame, by captivity, and by spoil,
[many] days. {11:34} Now when they shall fall, they shall be holpen
with a little help: but many shall cleave to them with flatteries.
{11:35} And [some] of them of understanding shall fall, to try them,
and to purge, and to make [them] white, [even] to the time of the end:
because [it is] yet for a time appointed. {11:36} And the king shall do
according to his will; and he shall exalt himself, and magnify himself
above every god, and shall speak marvellous things against the God of
gods, and shall prosper till the indignation be accomplished: for that
that is determined shall be done. {11:37} Neither shall he regard the
God of his fathers, nor the desire of women, nor regard any god: for he
shall magnify himself above all. {11:38} But in his estate shall he
honour the God of forces: and a god whom his fathers knew not shall he
honour with gold, and silver, and with precious stones, and pleasant
things. {11:39} Thus shall he do in the most strong holds with a
strange god, whom he shall acknowledge [and] increase with glory: and
he shall cause them to rule over many, and shall divide the land for
gain. {11:40} And at the time of the end shall the king of the south
push at him: and the king of the north shall come against him like a
whirlwind, with chariots, and with horsemen, and with many ships; and
he shall enter into the countries, and shall overflow and pass over.
{11:41} He shall enter also into the glorious land, and many
[countries] shall be overthrown: but these shall escape out of his
hand, [even] Edom, and Moab, and the chief of the children of Ammon.
{11:42} He shall stretch forth his hand also upon the countries: and
the land of Egypt shall not escape. {11:43} But he shall have power
over the treasures of gold and of silver, and over all the precious
things of Egypt: and the Libyans and the Ethiopians [shall be] at his
steps. {11:44} But tidings out of the east and out of the north shall
trouble him: therefore he shall go forth with great fury to destroy,
and utterly to make away many. {11:45} And he shall plant the
tabernacles of his palace between the seas in the glorious holy
mountain; yet he shall come to his end, and none shall help him.

   {12:1} And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great prince
which standeth for the children of thy people: and there shall be a
time of trouble, such as never was since there was a nation [even] to
that same time: and at that time thy people shall be delivered, every
one that shall be found written in the book. {12:2} And many of them
that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting
life, and some to shame [and] everlasting contempt. {12:3} And they
that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they
that turn many to righteousness as the stars for ever and ever. {12:4}
But thou, O Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the book, [even] to the
time of the end: many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be
increased.

   {12:5} Then I Daniel looked, and, behold, there stood other two, the
one on this side of the bank of the river, and the other on that side
of the bank of the river. {12:6} And [one] said to the man clothed in
linen, which [was] upon the waters of the river, How long [shall it be
to] the end of these wonders? {12:7} And I heard the man clothed in
linen, which [was] upon the waters of the river, when he held up his
right hand and his left hand unto heaven, and sware by him that liveth
for ever that [it shall be] for a time, times, and an half; and when he
shall have accomplished to scatter the power of the holy people, all
these [things] shall be finished. {12:8} And I heard, but I understood
not: then said I, O my Lord, what [shall be] the end of these [things?
]{12:9} And he said, Go thy way, Daniel: for the words [are] closed up
and sealed till the time of the end. {12:10} Many shall be purified,
and made white, and tried; but the wicked shall do wickedly: and none
of the wicked shall understand; but the wise shall understand. {12:11}
And from the time [that] the daily [sacrifice] shall be taken away, and
the abomination that maketh desolate set up, [there shall be] a
thousand two hundred and ninety days. {12:12} Blessed [is] he that
waiteth, and cometh to the thousand three hundred and five and thirty
days. {12:13} But go thou thy way till the end [be:] for thou shalt
rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of the days.


The History of Susanna [in Daniel]

   Set apart from the beginning of Daniel, because it is not in the
Hebrew, as neither the Narration of Bel and the Dragon.



   {13:1} There dwelt a man in Babylon, called Joacim:

   {13:2} And he took a wife, whose name was Susanna, the daughter of
Chelcias, a very fair woman, and one that feared the Lord.

   {13:3} Her parents also were righteous, and taught their daughter
according to the law of Moses.

   {13:4} Now Joacim was a great rich man, and had a fair garden joining
unto his house: and to him resorted the Jews; because he was more
honourable than all others.

   {13:5} The same year were appointed two of the ancients of the people
to be judges, such as the Lord spake of, that wickedness came from
Babylon from ancient judges, who seemed to govern the people.

   {13:6} These kept much at Joacim's house: and all that had any suits
in law came unto them.

   {13:7} Now when the people departed away at noon, Susanna went into
her husband's garden to walk.

   {13:8} And the two elders saw her going in every day, and walking; so
that their lust was inflamed toward her.

   {13:9} And they perverted their own mind, and turned away their eyes,
that they might not look unto heaven, nor remember just judgments.

   {13:10} And albeit they both were wounded with her love, yet durst
not one shew another his grief.

   {13:11} For they were ashamed to declare their lust, that they
desired to have to do with her.

   {13:12} Yet they watched diligently from day to day to see her.

   {13:13} And the one said to the other, Let us now go home: for it is
dinner time.

   {13:14} So when they were gone out, they parted the one from the
other, and turning back again they came to the same place; and after
that they had asked one another the cause, they acknowledged their
lust: then appointed they a time both together, when they might find
her alone.

   {13:15} And it fell out, as they watched a fit time, she went in as
before with two maids only, and she was desirous to wash herself in the
garden: for it was hot.

   {13:16} And there was no body there save the two elders, that had hid
themselves, and watched her.

   {13:17} Then she said to her maids, Bring me oil and washing balls,
and shut the garden doors, that I may wash me.

   {13:18} And they did as she bade them, and shut the garden doors, and
went out themselves at privy doors to fetch the things that she had
commanded them: but they saw not the elders, because they were hid.

   {13:19} Now when the maids were gone forth, the two elders rose up,
and ran unto her, saying,

   {13:20} Behold, the garden doors are shut, that no man can see us,
and we are in love with thee; therefore consent unto us, and lie with
us.

   {13:21} If thou wilt not, we will bear witness against thee, that a
young man was with thee: and therefore thou didst send away thy maids
from thee.

   {13:22} Then Susanna sighed, and said, I am straitened on every side:
for if I do this thing, it is death unto me: and if I do it not I
cannot escape your hands.

   {13:23} It is better for me to fall into your hands, and not do it,
than to sin in the sight of the Lord.

   {13:24} With that Susanna cried with a loud voice: and the two elders
cried out against her.

   {13:25} Then ran the one, and opened the garden door.

   {13:26} So when the servants of the house heard the cry in the
garden, they rushed in at the privy door, to see what was done unto her.

   {13:27} But when the elders had declared their matter, the servants
were greatly ashamed: for there was never such a report made of Susanna.

   {13:28} And it came to pass the next day, when the people were
assembled to her husband Joacim, the two elders came also full of
mischievous imagination against Susanna to put her to death;

   {13:29} And said before the people, Send for Susanna, the daughter of
Chelcias, Joacim's wife. And so they sent.

   {13:30} So she came with her father and mother, her children, and all
her kindred.

   {13:31} Now Susanna was a very delicate woman, and beauteous to
behold.

   {13:32} And these wicked men commanded to uncover her face, (for she
was covered) that they might be filled with her beauty.

   {13:33} Therefore her friends and all that saw her wept.

   {13:34} Then the two elders stood up in the midst of the people, and
laid their hands upon her head.

   {13:35} And she weeping looked up toward heaven: for her heart
trusted in the Lord.

   {13:36} And the elders said, As we walked in the garden alone, this
woman came in with two maids, and shut the garden doors, and sent the
maids away.

   {13:37} Then a young man, who there was hid, came unto her, and lay
with her.

   {13:38} Then we that stood in a corner of the garden, seeing this
wickedness, ran unto them.

   {13:39} And when we saw them together, the man we could not hold: for
he was stronger than we, and opened the door, and leaped out.

   {13:40} But having taken this woman, we asked who the young man was,
but she would not tell us: these things do we testify.

   {13:41} Then the assembly believed them as those that were the elders
and judges of the people: so they condemned her to death.

   {13:42} Then Susanna cried out with a loud voice, and said, O
everlasting God, that knowest the secrets, and knowest all things
before they be:

   {13:43} Thou knowest that they have borne false witness against me,
and, behold, I must die; whereas I never did such things as these men
have maliciously invented against me.

   {13:44} And the Lord heard her voice.

   {13:45} Therefore when she was led to be put to death, the Lord
raised up the holy spirit of a young youth whose name was Daniel:

   {13:46} Who cried with a loud voice, I am clear from the blood of
this woman.

   {13:47} Then all the people turned them toward him, and said, What
mean these words that thou hast spoken?

   {13:48} So he standing in the midst of them said, Are ye such fools,
ye sons of Israel, that without examination or knowledge of the truth
ye have condemned a daughter of Israel?

   {13:49} Return again to the place of judgment: for they have borne
false witness against her.

   {13:50} Wherefore all the people turned again in haste, and the
elders said unto him, Come, sit down among us, and shew it us, seeing
God hath given thee the honour of an elder.

   {13:51} Then said Daniel unto them, Put these two aside one far from
another, and I will examine them.

   {13:52} So when they were put asunder one from another, he called one
of them, and said unto him, O thou that art waxen old in wickedness,
now thy sins which thou hast committed aforetime are come to light.

   {13:53} For thou hast pronounced false judgment and hast condemned
the innocent and hast let the guilty go free; albeit the Lord saith,
The innocent and righteous shalt thou not slay.

   {13:54} Now then, if thou hast seen her, tell me, Under what tree
sawest thou them companying together? Who answered, Under a mastick
tree.

   {13:55} And Daniel said, Very well; thou hast lied against thine own
head; for even now the angel of God hath received the sentence of God
to cut thee in two.

   {13:56} So he put him aside, and commanded to bring the other, and
said unto him, O thou seed of Chanaan, and not of Juda, beauty hath
deceived thee, and lust hath perverted thine heart.

   {13:57} Thus have ye dealt with the daughters of Israel, and they for
fear companied with you: but the daughter of Juda would not abide your
wickedness.

   {13:58} Now therefore tell me, Under what tree didst thou take them
companying together? Who answered, Under an holm tree.

   {13:59} Then said Daniel unto him, Well; thou hast also lied against
thine own head: for the angel of God waiteth with the sword to cut thee
in two, that he may destroy you.

   {13:60} With that all the assembly cried out with a loud voice, and
praised God, who saveth them that trust in him.

   {13:61} And they arose against the two elders, for Daniel had
convicted them of false witness by their own mouth:

   {13:62} And according to the law of Moses they did unto them in such
sort as they maliciously intended to do to their neighbour: and they
put them to death. Thus the innocent blood was saved the same day.

   {13:63} Therefore Chelcias and his wife praised God for their
daughter Susanna, with Joacim her husband, and all the kindred, because
there was no dishonesty found in her.

   {13:64} From that day forth was Daniel had in great reputation in the
sight of the people.


The Book of Bel and the Dragon [in Daniel]

   The History of the Destruction of Bel and the Dragon, Cut off from
the end of Daniel.



   {14:1} And king Astyages was gathered to his fathers, and Cyrus of
Persia received his kingdom.

   {14:2} And Daniel conversed with the king, and was honoured above all
his friends.

   {14:3} Now the Babylons had an idol, called Bel, and there were spent
upon him every day twelve great measures of fine flour, and forty
sheep, and six vessels of wine.

   {14:4} And the king worshipped it and went daily to adore it: but
Daniel worshipped his own God. And the king said unto him, Why dost not
thou worship Bel?

   {14:5} Who answered and said, Because I may not worship idols made
with hands, but the living God, who hath created the heaven and the
earth, and hath sovereignty over all flesh.

   {14:6} Then said the king unto him, Thinkest thou not that Bel is a
living God? seest thou not how much he eateth and drinketh every day?

   {14:7} Then Daniel smiled, and said, O king, be not deceived: for
this is but clay within, and brass without, and did never eat or drink
any thing.

   {14:8} So the king was wroth, and called for his priests, and said
unto them, If ye tell me not who this is that devoureth these expences,
ye shall die.

   {14:9} But if ye can certify me that Bel devoureth them, then Daniel
shall die: for he hath spoken blasphemy against Bel. And Daniel said
unto the king, Let it be according to thy word.

   {14:10} Now the priests of Bel were threescore and ten, beside their
wives and children. And the king went with Daniel into the temple of
Bel.

   {14:11} So Bel's priests said, Lo, we go out: but thou, O king, set
on the meat, and make ready the wine, and shut the door fast and seal
it with thine own signet;

   {14:12} And to morrow when thou comest in, if thou findest not that
Bel hath eaten up all, we will suffer death: or else Daniel, that
speaketh falsely against us.

   {14:13} And they little regarded it: for under the table they had
made a privy entrance, whereby they entered in continually, and
consumed those things.

   {14:14} So when they were gone forth, the king set meats before Bel.
Now Daniel had commanded his servants to bring ashes, and those they
strewed throughout all the temple in the presence of the king alone:
then went they out, and shut the door, and sealed it with the king's
signet, and so departed.

   {14:15} Now in the night came the priests with their wives and
children, as they were wont to do, and did eat and drink up all.

   {14:16} In the morning betime the king arose, and Daniel with him.

   {14:17} And the king said, Daniel, are the seals whole? And he said,
Yea, O king, they be whole.

   {14:18} And as soon as he had opened the dour, the king looked upon
the table, and cried with a loud voice, Great art thou, O Bel, and with
thee is no deceit at all.

   {14:19} Then laughed Daniel, and held the king that he should not go
in, and said, Behold now the pavement, and mark well whose footsteps
are these.

   {14:20} And the king said, I see the footsteps of men, women, and
children. And then the king was angry,

   {14:21} And took the priests with their wives and children, who
shewed him the privy doors, where they came in, and consumed such
things as were upon the table.

   {14:22} Therefore the king slew them, and delivered Bel into Daniel's
power, who destroyed him and his temple.

   {14:23} And in that same place there was a great dragon, which they
of Babylon worshipped.

   {14:24} And the king said unto Daniel, Wilt thou also say that this
is of brass? lo, he liveth, he eateth and drinketh; thou canst not say
that he is no living god: therefore worship him.

   {14:25} Then said Daniel unto the king, I will worship the Lord my
God: for he is the living God.

   {14:26} But give me leave, O king, and I shall slay this dragon
without sword or staff. The king said, I give thee leave.

   {14:27} Then Daniel took pitch, and fat, and hair, and did seethe
them together, and made lumps thereof: this he put in the dragon's
mouth, and so the dragon burst in sunder : and Daniel said, Lo, these
are the gods ye worship.

   {14:28} When they of Babylon heard that, they took great indignation,
and conspired against the king, saying, The king is become a Jew, and
he hath destroyed Bel, he hath slain the dragon, and put the priests to
death.

   {14:29} So they came to the king, and said, Deliver us Daniel, or
else we will destroy thee and thine house.

   {14:30} Now when the king saw that they pressed him sore, being
constrained, he delivered Daniel unto them:

   {14:31} Who cast him into the lions' den: where he was six days.

   {14:32} And in the den there were seven lions, and they had given
them every day two carcases, and two sheep: which then were not given
to them, to the intent they might devour Daniel.

   {14:33} Now there was in Jewry a prophet, called Habbacuc, who had
made pottage, and had broken bread in a bowl, and was going into the
field, for to bring it to the reapers.

   {14:34} But the angel of the Lord said unto Habbacuc, Go, carry the
dinner that thou hast into Babylon unto Daniel, who is in the lions'
den.

   {14:35} And Habbacuc said, Lord, I never saw Babylon; neither do I
know where the den is.

   {14:36} Then the angel of the Lord took him by the crown, and bare
him by the hair of his head, and through the vehemency of his spirit
set him in Babylon over the den.

   {14:37} And Habbacuc cried, saying, O Daniel, Daniel, take the dinner
which God hath sent thee.

   {14:38} And Daniel said, Thou hast remembered me, O God: neither hast
thou forsaken them that seek thee and love thee.

   {14:39} So Daniel arose, and did eat: and the angel of the Lord set
Habbacuc in his own place again immediately.

   {14:40} Upon the seventh day the king went to bewail Daniel: and when
he came to the den, he looked in, and behold, Daniel was sitting.

   {14:41} Then cried the king with a loud voice, saying, Great art Lord
God of Daniel, and there is none other beside thee.

   {14:42} And he drew him out, and cast those that were the cause of
his destruction into the den: and they were devoured in a moment before
his face.










